---
layout: post
title: "MXFP8 GEMM: 99% of cuBLAS performance using CUDA + PTX"
date: 2026-03-21
---

I recently did a deep-dive on writing GEMM kernels with just CUDA + PTX for Ampere, Hopper, and Blackwell GPUs, culminating in a MXFP8 GEMM [kernel](https://github.com/danielvegamyhre/gemm/blob/main/blackwell/mxfp8/3_tcgen05_mxfp8_2cta_256n_overlap128_tma_store/tcgen05_mxfp8_2cta_256n_overlap128_tma_store.cu) which achieves up to 99% of cuBLAS (`torch._scaled_mm`) depending on the problem shape - see microbenchmarks below, measured on a B200 with 1000W power draw using CUDA 13.0:

| Matrix Size | Custom Kernel | PyTorch _scaled_mm | Speedup |
|-------------|---------------|-------------------|---------|
| M=2048, K=2048, N=2048 | 17.504 us (981.48 tflops) | 17.248 us (996.05 tflops) | 0.99x |
| M=4096, K=4096, N=4096 | 62.432 us (2201.42 tflops) | 54.112 us (2539.90 tflops) | 0.87x |
| M=8192, K=8192, N=8192 | 427.104 us (2574.34 tflops) | 418.688 us (2626.09 tflops) | 0.98x |
| M=16384, K=16384, N=16384 | 3625.088 us (2426.45 tflops) | 3507.552 us (2507.76 tflops) | 0.97x |

 It was an interesting and rewarding journey, and in this post I'll walk through some of the optimizations I did to improve from my first attempt (35% of cuBLAS) to the final design, what I tried that didn't work (we should report failures as well!), and remaining unsolved problems (notably, M=N=K=4096 is stubbornly farther from optimal!).

Like all of us, I stand on the shoulders of giants before me, who wrote invaluable posts on GEMM kernel design for Ampere ([Simon's blog](https://siboehm.com/articles/22/CUDA-MMM)), Hopper ([Pranjal's blog](https://cudaforfun.substack.com/p/outperforming-cublas-on-h100-a-worklog)), and Blackwell ([Thien's blog](https://gau-nernst.github.io/tcgen05/)), which I highly recommend reading for background knowledge before starting this one. These posts are all for higher precision dtypes (float32 or bfloat16), so my goal here is to contribute a post on **MXFP8** GEMM kernel design, which is a new low precision numerical format with native acceleration on Blackwell GPUs, offering up to 2x higher TFLOPs/sec than bfloat16 (theoretical).

Using MXFP8 introduces some new concepts and challenges, and those are what this post will focus on. In addition, we make heavy use of inline PTX, which is necessary to use the latest hardware features from CUDA, so I will attempt to explain their requirements and semantics in plain language, hopefully more clearly than the PTX docs!

The code can be found [here](https://github.com/danielvegamyhre/gemm/blob/main/blackwell/mxfp8/
) (kernels for Ampere and Hopper can be found in this repo as well, if you're interested).

Table of Contents:

1. **Initial kernel**: 2CTA MMA with MMA_N=128; double-buffered TMEM; warp-specialized, persistent kernel with static schedule
2. **Optimization 1**: Increasing MMA_N to 256; overlap 128 columns of TMEM accumulator buffers and ping-pong between them
3. **Optimization 2**: Avoid warp stalling caused by dynamic indexing into arrays
4. **Optimization 3**: Increase width of vectorized stores from float4 (4 floats) to 8 floats via inline PTX
5. **Optimization 4**: Use Hilbert curve for block scheduling to improve cache utilization
6. **Optimization 5**: Use L1::no_allocate modifier for st.global.v8.f32 instruction in epilogue
7. **Optimization 6**: New epilogue strategy: TMEM -> REG -> pipelined TMA stores
8. **Optimization 7**: Heuristic based epilogue strategy

Unimpactful changes:
1. TMA multicasting GMEM->SMEM loads to both CTAs for SFB
2. More granular accumulator overlapping in TMEM (64 columns of overlap)
3. Triple buffering TMEM

## (Optional background on MXFP8): What is MXFP8 and why do we care about writing a GEMM with it?
MXFP8 is a "micro-scaled" numerical format ([OCP spec](https://www.opencompute.org/documents/ocp-microscaling-formats-mx-v1-0-spec-final-pdf)) defined by two parts: the **data** and the **scales**. The data is in float8 e4m3 format (1 sign bit, 4 exponent bits, 3 mantissa bits). The scales are in float8 e8m0 format (unsigned, 8 exponent bits, no mantisssa bits). This is an unsigned representation of a standard float32 exponent where exponent bits are interpreted as `2^exponent`, meaning these are power of 2 scales. MXFP8 uses granular 1x32 scaling factors, meaning every 1x32 chunk of input data shares a single e8m0 scale factor that is used to scale the values into the dynamic range of float8 e4m3: [-448, 448].

**Benefits of MXFP8**: The finer-grained scaling factor makes it more resilient to outliers in the data. We compute the scaling factor using the absolute maximum value in the 1x32 block, to calculate how much we need to scale it (and the rest of the block) to fit in the dynamic range of e4m3, and "fill". If all the values are very small, the values will be "stretched" to fill the dynamic range of [-448, 448]. If there is a very large value in the data, we'll scale the values down to fit in this range. If there is a large outlier in the data, as is often the case for input activations and gradients, this can cause some already small values to underflow to 0 when we try to scale them down beyond what is representible in e4m3. That information is now lost, we can't dequantize a 0 back to some arbitrary value. Therefore, given we expect outliers in our data, it is best to mitigate the impact of outliers by using a granular scaling factor, so the outlier can only impact those 32 elements, not more.



## Terminology:
- `M`,`N`,`K` = global input tensor dimensions for `A @ B = C` with shape `(M,K) @ (K,N) = (M,N)`
- `SFA`, `SFB` = scale factors for A and B tensors
- `SF_K` = global scale factor K dimension, which will be `K//32`. M and N dims of scale factor are the same as input tensor. SFA/SFB both have the same SF_K dim, but with M or N rows respectively.
- `BM`,`BN`,`BK` = tile dimensions of A (`(BM,BK)`) and B (`(BN,BK)`) we load into shared memory.
- `SF_BK` = scale factor tile K dim, equal to `BK//32`. Same for SFA and SFB.
- `MMA_M`,`MMA_N`,`MMA_K` = dimensions for `tcgen05.mma` instruction which does matrix-multiply accumulate operation on 5th gen tensorcores

## Input data layouts for tcgen05.mma
The input tensors A and B are both float8 e4m3 format, in K-major layout:
- A shape (M,K) with strides (K,1)
- B shape (N,K) with strides (K,1)

The scale factors SFA and SFB are both float8 e8m0 format, in a special "blocked layout" required for tensorcore consumption with `tcgen05.mma`, representible as a ((32,4),4) CuTE layout. This is a weird layout at first, so here are some diagrams that help visualize the layout. The top diagram shows the scale factors in simple row major layout as they are originally computed for the input tensor; the bottom layout shows how that row major layout is transformed into blocked layout. These steps happen ahead of time in a torchao quantization kernel which prepares the inputs for a MXFP8 GEMM:

**Step 1**: Read input data, compute scales. At this point scales are row-major.
<diagram>

**Step 2**: Write to global memory in ((32,4),4) blocked layout. Note these new 16 element wide "superrows" are contiguous in memory.
    - Note: we write scales to this way because this is the layout required for consumption by tensorcores with the `tcgen05.mma.cta_group::2.kind::mxf8f6f4.block_scale.block32` instruction we'll be using for MMA operations on Blackwell's 5th gen tensorcores! More on this later.
<diagram>

## tcgen05.mma.cta_group::2.kind::mxf8f6f4.block_scale.block32
The MMA instruction we'll be using is: `tcgen05.mma.block.

## Initial kernel: warp-specialized persistent kernel with static schedule; use 2CTA MMA; double-buffered TMEM

As you can probably tell by the name, we will not be starting our MXFP8 GEMM journey with a naive kernel design; having just finished working on various [BF16 GEMM kernels for Blackwell](https://github.com/danielvegamyhre/gemm/tree/main/blackwell/bf16), I had a pretty good idea of a sensible design to start with. Our goal here is to start with something functional with reasonable, though not necessarily optimal, design choices that we can iterate upon.

#### High level design

- **Persisent kernel with warp specialization**: We will use a standard warp-specialized producer -> consumer -> epilogue design to hide global memory latency and turn each SM into a "conveyor belt" processing tiles of computation. This design pipelines the load -> process -> store steps to overlap the expensive, high latency global loads/stores with our `tcgen05.mma` instructions. Ideally, our pipeline will achieve a high level of overlapping of both global loads (producer) and global stores (epilogue), and minimize tensorcore idle time. It should look something like this:

<diagram>

- **2CTA MMA**: To maximize arithmetic intensity and tensorcore utilization, we want the M and N dimensions of our `tcgen05.mma` operations to be as large as possible. On Blackwell, this is achieved by using the new "2CTA MMA" feature that allows two CTAs to cooperatively compute one large 256x256 output tile:
    - Each CTA holds half the A tile and half the B tile in their SMEM
    - Each CTA uses DSMEM (distributed shared memory) to access the remote portions of the operands as necessary.
    - Each CTA holds half of the output tile in TMEM.
This reduces global memory traffic, as each CTA only needs to load half the A/B operands, and increases arithmetic intensity by increasing our FLOPs/byte ratio. The best explanation I've found for the specific details of how a 2-CTA `tcgen05.mma` is implemented is [tcgen05 for dummies](https://gau-nernst.github.io/tcgen05/).

<diagram>

Understanding 2 CTA `tcgen05.mma` synchronization patterns is crucial for this kernel design, so let's walk through the flow before diving deeper:

1. **Both CTAs**: Producer warp loads A/B tiles from GMEM -> SMEM with `cp.async.bulk.tensor` (TMA):
    - Wait for next SMEM buffer in the queue to be ready if necessary (epilogue finished reading data from it).
    - Issue TMA loads for A tile shape (BM, BK), and B tile shape (BK, BN/2). CTA 0 loads left half of B tile, CTA 1 loads the right half.
    - Issue TMA loads for SFA tile shape (BM, BK//32) and SFB tile shape (BK//32, BN). Note SFA is completely different for both CTA 0 and CTA 1, but SFB actually has to be *replicated* on both CTAs! Both CTAs have the full (BK//32, BN) SFB even though they each only hold (BK, BN/2) columns of B. (Fun note: this is not officially documented by NVIDIA anywhere that I'm aware of, but luckily I had seen this [tweet thread](https://x.com/gaunernst/status/2008183108999487627?s=20) from Thien about NVFP4 GEMMs prior to starting this work, and I assumed this same oddity might apply to MXFP8 as well, and so it does!)
    - We map the mbarrier on CTA 1 to the mbarrier on CTA 0 using `mapa.shared::cluster.u32` which allows us to map a shared memory address to the same address on the other CTA. This is necessary because **only CTA 0** will actually issue the `tcgen05.mma` instruction, so we need both CTAs to signal this mbarrier when all the necessary data is ready in SMEM for the MMA.
2. **CTA 0 only**: Consumer warp copies SFA/SFB from SMEM into TMEM in ((32,4),4) layout with `tcgen05.cp`:
    - CTA 0


- **Producer loads A/B tiles into SMEM**: TODO

#### Loading A/B tiles from GMEM to SMEM
- core matrices
- swizzling
- TMA for this

#### Loading SFA/SFB tiles from GMEM to SMEM
- Scale factor layout for tcgen05.mma with mxf8f6f4.block_scale.block32
- TMA for this

#### Transferring SFA/SFB tiles from SMEM to TMEM to prepare for tcgen05.mma
- blocked layout for tensorcores consumption with tcgen05.mma
- core matrices

#### 2CTA MMA
TODO

#### Double buffering TMEM
TODO

Wow, that was a lot to understand, let alone implement correctly - yet here we are, standing brow-beaten at only 35% of cuBLAS performance! What can we do to improve this?

## Optimization 1: Increasing MMA_N to 256; overlap 128 columns of TMEM accumulator buffers and ping-pong between them

- tcgen05.mma instruction supports larger N dimension, will improve arithmetic intensity and TFLOPS/sec
- Not enough TMEM to double buffer with MMA_N=256!
- Solution: partially overlap accumulators and ping pong between them
